design doc draft1 (#2)
hashsequence/Linux-Job-Worker: README.md

* Client should be able to query result of the job execution and fetch the logs

## Design Document

### Limitations And Scope

#### Data Management
Though the use of a database to store persistant data would be ideal, I will be instead storing the outputs and error outputs into logs stored on 

> the file storage of the linux worker. The logs will be generated at start time with the foldername \<pid\>_\<startingTimestamp\>

Reviewer: if you need to create the log folder before starting the command, you won't have a PID until the command is already running and writing output.
instead, I recommend using some other _unique_ (note: PIDs are not unique) identifier for the jobs.

Author: thats a good point,
another idea i have floating around my head is generate a uuid with https://github.com/google/uuid and create a log folder:
\<uuid\>-\<startingtimestamp\> and if a process a created a log in the folder would be created called PID-\<pid\>-stdout.log and PID-\<pid\>-stderr.log and if it finishes it will generate a end log called END-\<endTimeStamp\>.log, the client will immediately get a response back from the start rpc with the pid and the uuid. When the client wants to query the status of a job, it should use the pid and the uuid, that way when the job is already completed, the user can still query the logs based on the uuid

> The client will have to maintain a queue of commands, the client can query the server to see what is running to determine what can be killed,

Reviewer: Can you make the client stateless?
It shouldn't have to persist a queue of commands, the list of jobs can be fetched from the server.

or the client can store response data from server.

#### Scale

> The scope of this project would only deal with a single linux worker server interfacing with one client

Reviewer: the server should support multiple clients

Author: I will change that in the readme, thanks

### API Design

* The client will have an Command Api that takes in three types of request, Start, Stop, and Query.

* The client can then execute the commands over the server via Execute Api

```
type CommandRequest {

>     variableTypeRequest {

Reviewer: what's a `variableTypeRequest` in gRPC terms? is it `oneof`?
if so, please use separate RPCs for start/stop/querypid/queryrunningprocesses instead

Author: will do

        StartRequest start 
        StopRequest stop 
        QueryRequest query 
    }
}

type CommandResponse {
    variableField response {
        StartResponse responseFromStart 
        StopResponse responseFromStop 
        QueryResponse responseFromQuery 
    }
}

func Execute(CommandRequest) returns(CommandResponse)

```

#### Start

* The Start command is called with a StartRequest that has the client's command and required arguments and optional env, dir params

> * The Process be executed, three logs will be generated, the standard output and standard error will be redirected into a log file, one for stdout and another for stderr, the third log called programName.log will have the name of the program and arguments executed in the contents of the log. All logs will be located in the same folder with the foldername \<pid\>_\<startingTimestamp\>, a response with the pid is sent, outputs should be empty since it was just started

Reviewer 2: Long term log persistence is not a hard requirement, so if you find it easier to store logs in-memory that is totally OK.

Author: will definitely consider this, and think about more

* When the process is completed or exit out due to errors the log folder will have a timestamp appended so pids can be reused

> * A second response will be sent to indicate thats its finished with the outputs and error outputs

Reviewer: also include the exit code of the process

Author: will do

> * Logs will be outputted to the output and errOutput (up to a certain size from the top) of the response and sent to the client via a response when done 

Reviewer: If I understand correctly:
- the client opens connects to the server
- the client sends StartRequest
- the server starts the command and sends 1st StartResponse
- the client receives StartResponse and waits, keeping the connection open
- the command finishes and server sends a 2nd StartResponse
- the client receives StartResponse, prints output and closes the connection

If my understanding is correct, let's change this so that client doesn't need to wait with an idle connection until the command is complete.
As a user, I should be able to kick off multiple long-running commands in parallel and fetch their results asynchronously whenever I want.

Author: I will definitely revisit the design of the start process

Author: I originally envisioned a bidirectional streaming api so the client and server can send requests and responses back and forth asynchronously, but I redesigned it to split out the rpcs for each type of request to make it simpler.

```
type LogOutput {
    //contents of log, (may change to string array)
    string contents 
}

type StartRequest {
    //path of a program or executable
    string command
    //arguments to invoke program or executable with
    []string args 
    // environment variables for the execution
    //OPTIONAL variable
    []string env
    // current working directory of the execution
    //OPTIONAL variable, default will be the working directory of server 
    string dir 
}

type StartResponse {
    //process Id of the running process executed by the command
    //will be 0 if process failed to execute
    int pid 
    //stdout(standard output) of command/program executed
    LogOutput output
    //stderr(standard Error) of command/program executed

>     LogOutput ErrorOutput 

Reviewer: let's rename these to `stdout` and `stderr`, to be consistent with Linux terminology

Author: I will change that in the readme, thanks

>     //if the command was finished it will be 0, otherwise if command successfully completes it will be 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    //if the command is running it will be 0, otherwise if command successfully completes it will be 1
```

Author: noted and will change on README

    bool finished
    //timestamp returns the starting time if just executed or finish time if finished
    string timeStamp 
}

```
#### Stop

* The User should be able to stop the request based on the pid

* When stopped the pid should be killed 

* A response will be sent to client indicating process have been stopped along with the contents of the log

```
type StopRequest {
    int pid
}

type StopResponse {
    LogOutput Output
    LogOutput errorOutput
    bool isKilled
}

```

#### Query 

* The client should be able to check what processes are still running

* The Client should be able fetch the logs and fetch the status of the process by pid and starting timestamp

* The client should able to view list of all logs generated by the server

* Client should be able to read the logs into memory and send it and will only grab up to a certain amout of bytes from
the file to prevent maxing out string size or memory 

> * There will be only two types of Query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There will be only three types of Query
```

    * QueryOneProcess:

        * get information on one pid

    * QueryRunningProcesses:

        * get list of running processes from server

    * QueryListOfLogs

>         * get list of all logs generated by server 

Reviewer: this is not needed.
client should be able to list all processes and get the logs for any individual process.
getting logs for all processes at once won't be practical

Author: noted and will take out QueryListOfLogs

```
type ProcessInfo {
    int32 pid 

>     string startingTimeStamp 

Reviewer: also add endTimestamp

Author: noted

    string processName 
    bool isRunning 

>     string logPath 

Reviewer: since this path is on the server, client doesn't need it

Author: noted

}

type QueryPidRequest {
    int pid 
    string startingTimeStamp
}

type QueryPidResponse {
    LogOutput output 
    LogOutput errorOutput 
    bool isRunning 
}

type QueryRunningProcessesRequest {
    //will be empty since the server just needs to verify its a QueryRunningProcessesRequest
}
    
type QueryRunningProcessesResponse {
     ProcessInfo[] processTable = 1;
}

type QueryListOfLogsRequest {
    //will be empty since the server just needs to verify its a QueryListOfLogsRequest
}

type QueryListOfLogsResponse {
    repeated ProcessInfo processTable = 1;
}

> type QueryRunningProcessesResponse {
>      ProcessInfo[] processTable = 1;
> }

Reviewer: duplicate
```suggestion
```

Author: thanks!

type QueryRequest {
    variableField queryCommand {
        QueryPidRequest queryPid 
        QueryRunningProcessesRequest queryRunningProcesses 
        QueryListOfLogsResponse responseFromListOfLogs
    }
}

type QueryResponse {
variableField responseFromQuery {
        QueryPidResponse responseFromQueryPid
        QueryRunningProcessesResponse responseFromRunningProcesses
        QueryListOfLogsResponse responseFromListOfLogs 
    }
}

```

### Implementation Overview 

* Using GRPC so the above methods and types with be generated via protocol buffers (will be using libprotoc 3.11.4)

####  DataStore

> * we can use sync.Map in Go to implement a set of structs to store process info

Reviewer: Use a regular map with a mutex instead, per `sync.Map` docs:

> The Map type is specialized. Most code should use a plain Go map instead, with separate locking or coordination, for better type safety and to make it easier to maintain other invariants along with the map content.

Author: noted, I'll revisit, and think more about the DataStore design

    
    * will be similar to how linux implements it using the /proc path, but simpler:
        ```
        $ ls -al  /proc | head -n 10
        total 4
        dr-xr-xr-x 312 root             root                           0 Aug 24 11:41 .
        drwxr-xr-x  23 root             root                        4096 Aug 17 16:01 ..
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 root             root                           0 Aug 24 11:41 1
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 root             root                           0 Aug 26 16:40 10
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 avwong13         avwong13                       0 Aug 26 16:40 1003
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 root             root                           0 Aug 26 17:08 1004
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 avwong13         avwong13                       0 Aug 25 23:08 10202
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 avwong13         avwong13                       0 Aug 25 23:09 10256
        dr-xr-xr-x   9 avwong13         avwong13                       0 Aug 24 13:25 10485
        ```

* The server will only store running pids in memory and have the pass logs available in their respective \<Pid\>_\<startingTimeStamp\> folder

* concurrent go routines to handle cmd executions starting and finishing 

> * killing of pid can be implemented can be done through sigkill via syscall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* killing of pid can be implemented through sigkill via syscall
```

> * killing of pid can be implemented can be done through sigkill via syscall

Reviewer: use https://golang.org/pkg/os/#Process.Signal instead (`os.Process` is provided by `os/exec.Command`)

> * Execute Api will be a bidirection streaming api, so the server can continously send back responses, while client can send new requests

Reviewer: gRPC can handle pipelining  for you - the same gRPC client can be used for multiple concurrent requests.
no need to complicate the Execute API

Author: will revisit this thanks

* Data for query for all processes ever executed by linux worker server should be generated by iterating through file system and extracting data from
logs and filepath using path packages

> * Implement simple logging for server, as in the server stdout and stderr will output into a log in the server's filesystem

Reviewer: don't worry about the logs of the server itself, they can go to stdout/stderr
if needed, something like systemd can redirect those to a file.

#### Client

* client is responsible for constructing the commands to be passed to server via the Execute Api

* client is responsible for interpreting response from Execute Api, and must check the response type

* client is responsible of constructing a queue to generate commands to feed to the Execute Api, or can be run by run via terminal

> ### Authentication

Reviewer 2: Could you elaborate on the trust model here a bit?  Why or why not would a specific server trust a specific client or vise-versa?

Author: I'll definitely elaborate more on that, thanks

* Using standard GRPC tsl/ssl encryption and authentication via certificates

* we will be using grpc with mutual tls

> * certificates will be generated using openssl and self-signed, though in a real production environment, certificates will be generated and signed 

Reviewer: how will client and server verify each others certificates?

Author: I will elaborate more on that thanks!

by a valid certificate authority (CA). there is :

    * public domains:

        *  Let’s Encrypt - a free automated open certificate authority got cert generation and distribution  

    * private domains:

        * vault to generate signing requests, centrify for renewels of certificates

### Contentious Issues

> * Should the client remember commands they executed and remember the pids, starting timestamp, process command?

Reviewer: yes, but not across restarts

> * Will logs that are too old be deleted by server, or should the logs just stay in the file system storage, should this be within the scope of the project?

Reviewer: log cleanup is not in scope

> * For the output of logs, should the should the contents of the log be loaded into a string array in the response message, or should I leave it as string?

Reviewer: a string or a byte array are fine

Reviewer 2: Byte array is preferable IMO; `string` tends to imply encoded text, even if `go` doesn't generally enforce it.

Author: I think I'm going to try to use []byte thanks
